IPv4 documentation (#1832)
questdb/questdb.io: docs/reference/operators/ipv4.md

---
title: IPv4 Operations
sidebar_label: IPv4
description: Operator examples with IPv4 type data.
---

This document outlines the IPv4 data type operators.

## Operators

> ### << Strict IP address contained by? 

Reviewer: Maybe take away the ? as it's no longer phrased as a question + same for contained by or equal below

> ### << Strict IP address contained by? 

Author: 👍

Takes one IPv4 argument and one string argument.

Returns a boolean.

#### Example

Use case: searching ip addresses by subnet

```sql
ipv4 '35.24.65.11' << '35.24.65.2/16' -> T
ipv4 '35.24.65.11' << '35.24.65.2/32' -> F
```

### <<=  IP address contained by or equal?

Takes one IPv4 argument and one string argument

Returns a boolean.

#### Example

Use case: searching ip addresses by subnet

```sql
ipv4 '35.24.65.11' << '35.24.65.2/16' -> T
ipv4 '35.24.65.11' << '35.24.65.2/32' -> T
```

### & Bitwise AND

Takes two IPv4 (string) arguments

> Returns an IPv4 address (string).

Reviewer: To print it to the console in dotted format (1.1.1.1) we have to print it as a string but given that internally ipv4 is an int, I think it is confusing/misleading to say that the return value is a string so I think it would be better to change all occurrences to just be "returns an ipv4 address"

#### Example

Use case: separating an ip address into its network and host portions    

```sql
ipv4 '215.53.40.9' & ipv4 '255.255.0.0' -> 215.53.0.0
ipv4 '99.8.63.41' & ipv4 '0.0.63.41' -> 0.0.63.41
```
### ~ Bitewise NOT

Takes one IPv4 argument

Returns an IPv4 address (string).

#### Example

Use case: computing broadcast address' bitmask from a netmask

```sql
~ ipv4 '255.255.0.0' -> 0.0.255.255
```

### | Bitwise OR

Takes two IPv4 arguments

Returns an IPv4 address (string).

#### Example

Use case: computing an ip address' broadcast address

```sql    
ipv4 '92.11.8.40' | '0.0.255.255' -> 92.11.255.255
```

> ### + Add off set to an IP address

Reviewer: Delete space between 'off' and 'set'

Takes one IPv4 argument and one int argument

Returns an IPv4 address (string).

#### Example
    
Use case: altering an ip address

```sql
ipv4 '92.11.8.40' + 5 -> 92.11.8.45
10 + ipv4 '2.6.43.8' -> 2.6.43.18
```

### - Subtract offset from IP address

Takes one IPv4 argument and one int argument

Returns an IPv4 address (string).

#### Example

```sql
ipv4 '92.11.8.40' - 5 -> 92.11.8.35
```

### - Difference between two IP addresses
    
Takes two IPv4 arguments
    
Returns a long.

#### Example

Use case: calculating the range of unique addresses between two ip addresses

```sql
ipv4 '92.11.8.40' - ipv4 '92.11.8.0' -> 40
```
    
### Random address generator - rnd_ipv4()

> Random address generator for a single address. 

Reviewer: What do you mean by 'for a single address'? rnd_ipv4() will generate random ips within the full valid range of ip addresses 0.0.0.1-255.255.255.255

Author: Typo!

---
title: IPv4 Operations
sidebar_label: IPv4
description: Operator examples with IPv4 type data.
---

This document outlines the IPv4 data type operators.

## Operators

### << Strict IP address contained by 

Takes one IPv4 argument and one string argument.

> Argument may contain a netmask.

Author: OK -- added more to the introduction, to wrap all these datatypes:

Specified:

* expected ranges
* storage as integers
* trailing & leading docs

Also elaborated each section to clarify string/int relationship per item.

> Argument may contain a netmask.

Reviewer: Great! Thanks

Returns a boolean.

#### Example

Use case: searching ip addresses by subnet

```sql
ipv4 '35.24.65.11' << '35.24.65.2/16' -> T
ipv4 '35.24.65.11' << '35.24.65.2/32' -> F
```

### <<=  IP address contained by or equal

Takes one IPv4 argument and one string argument

Argument may contain a netmask.

Returns a boolean.

#### Example

Use case: searching ip addresses by subnet

```sql
ipv4 '35.24.65.11' << '35.24.65.2/16' -> T
ipv4 '35.24.65.11' << '35.24.65.2/32' -> T
```

### & Bitwise AND

Takes two IPv4 (string) arguments.

Arguments cannot contain a netmask.

> Returns an IPv4 address.

Author: Pedantry thrives in documentation. 

Returns an IPv4 says:

Returns an Internet Protocol version 4.

Returns an IPv4 address says:

Returns an Internet Protocol version 4 address.

```sql    
ipv4 '92.11.8.40' | '0.0.255.255' -> 92.11.255.255
```

### + Add offset to an IP address

Takes one IPv4 argument and one int argument.

Arguments cannot contain a netmask.

Returns an IPv4 address.

#### Example
    
Use case: altering an ip address

```sql
ipv4 '92.11.8.40' + 5 -> 92.11.8.45
10 + ipv4 '2.6.43.8' -> 2.6.43.18
```

### - Subtract offset from IP address

Takes one IPv4 argument and one int argument.

Arguments cannot contain a netmask.

Returns an IPv4 address.

#### Example

```sql
ipv4 '92.11.8.40' - 5 -> 92.11.8.35
```

### - Difference between two IP addresses
    
Takes two IPv4 arguments.

Arguments cannot contain a netmask.
    
Returns a long.

#### Example

Use case: calculating the range of unique addresses between two ip addresses

```sql
ipv4 '92.11.8.40' - ipv4 '92.11.8.0' -> 40
```
    
### Random address generator - rnd_ipv4()

Random address generator for a single address. 

Returns a single IPv4 address.

Useful for testing.

### Random address range generator - rnd_ipv4(string, int) 

Generates a random ip address within the bounds of a given subnet.

`Int` argument dictates how many null values will be generated.

> Returns a range of IPv4 addresses.

Author: No worries! Writing is hard. :)

---
title: IPv4 Operations
sidebar_label: IPv4
description: Operator examples with IPv4 type data.
---

This document outlines the IPv4 data type operators.

> IPv4 addresses are **passed** as string, but are **stored** as 32bit integers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IPv4 addresses are **passed** as string, but are **stored** as 32-bit integers.
```

When applied as IPv4, they are presented between the range `0.0.0.1 - 255.255.255.255`.

When passed as a string, they may contain a subnet mask: `35.24.65.2/16`

Addresses when passed may contain trailing and leading dots: `...1.1.1.1...`

## Operators

### << Strict IP address contained by 

Takes one IPv4 argument and one string argument.

> IPv4 addresses are stored as an integer.
> 
> However, they are passed as a string.
> 
> As a result, string arguments can accept IPv4 addresses with a subnet mask.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The string argument can accept IPv4 addresses with a subnet mask.
```

Returns a boolean.

#### Example

Use case: searching ip addresses by subnet

```sql
ipv4 '35.24.65.11' << '35.24.65.2/16' -> T
ipv4 '35.24.65.11' << '35.24.65.2/32' -> F
```

### <<=  IP address contained by or equal

Takes one IPv4 argument and one string argument

> IPv4 addresses are stored as an integer.
> 
> However, they are passed as a string.
> 
> As a result, string arguments can accept IPv4 addresses with a subnet mask.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The string argument can accept IPv4 addresses with a subnet mask.
```

Returns a boolean.

#### Example

Use case: searching ip addresses by subnet

```sql
ipv4 '35.24.65.11' << '35.24.65.2/16' -> T
ipv4 '35.24.65.11' << '35.24.65.2/32' -> T
```

### & Bitwise AND

Takes two IPv4 arguments.

Arguments apply IPv4 addresses stored as an integer.

Therefore they cannot contain a subnet mask.

Returns an IPv4 address.

#### Example

Use case: separating an ip address into its network and host portions    

```sql
ipv4 '215.53.40.9' & ipv4 '255.255.0.0' -> 215.53.0.0
ipv4 '99.8.63.41' & ipv4 '0.0.63.41' -> 0.0.63.41
```
### ~ Bitewise NOT

Takes one IPv4 argument.

> Arguments apply IPv4 addresses stored as an integer.
> 
> Therefore they cannot contain a subnet mask.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Returns an IPv4 address.

#### Example

Use case: computing broadcast address' bitmask from a netmask

```sql
~ ipv4 '255.255.0.0' -> 0.0.255.255
```

### | Bitwise OR

Takes two IPv4 arguments.

> Arguments apply IPv4 addresses stored as an integer.
> 
> Therefore they cannot contain a subnet mask.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Returns an IPv4 address.

#### Example

Use case: computing an ip address' broadcast address

```sql    
ipv4 '92.11.8.40' | '0.0.255.255' -> 92.11.255.255
```

### + Add offset to an IP address

Takes one IPv4 argument and one integer argument.

> The IPv4 argument is stored as an integer.
> 
> Therefore the argument cannot contain a subnet mask.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Returns an IPv4 address.

#### Example
    
Use case: altering an ip address

```sql
ipv4 '92.11.8.40' + 5 -> 92.11.8.45
10 + ipv4 '2.6.43.8' -> 2.6.43.18
```

### - Subtract offset from IP address

Takes one IPv4 argument and one integer argument.

The IPv4 argument is stored as an integer.

Therefore the argument cannot contain a subnet mask.

Returns an IPv4 address.

#### Example

```sql
ipv4 '92.11.8.40' - 5 -> 92.11.8.35
```

### - Difference between two IP addresses
    
Takes two IPv4 arguments.

> Arguments apply IPv4 addresses stored as an integer.
> 
> Therefore they cannot contain a subnet mask.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    
Returns a long.

#### Example

Use case: calculating the range of unique addresses between two ip addresses

```sql
ipv4 '92.11.8.40' - ipv4 '92.11.8.0' -> 40
```
    
### Random address generator - rnd_ipv4()

Random address generator for a single address. 

Returns a single IPv4 address.

Useful for testing.

### Random address range generator - rnd_ipv4(string, int) 

Generates a random ip address within the bounds of a given subnet.

The integer argument dictates how many null values will be generated.

Returns an IPv4 address within specified range.

#### Example

```sql
rnd_ipv4('22.43.200.9/16', 0)
/* Return address between 22.43.0.0 - 22.43.255.25 */
22.43.200.12
```

> ## Limitations

Author: Put this here to leave the other pages be.

They need a general overhaul, so will save that for another day.
